welcome back this is lesson seven of
machinery zoom comes session six and in
this lesson we will talk about gradient
boosting which is a different way of
combining multiple decision tree models
into one ensemble so in the previous
lesson we looked at
random forest in random forest so you
take a data set and then you train
multiple independent decision trees on
this data set
and then you combine the result into one
single prediction by taking out an
average for example
and this is the final prediction
so here in this case for random forest
we train multiple independently so each
three is independent completely
independent from each other but there is
a different way of combining multiple
models into one ensemble which is called
boosting
in boosting we start first with a data
set
and we train the first model
and then the first model makes
predictions
and then what we do is we look at these
predictions and look what are the errors
that this model is making
then we get the errors
of model one
and based on these errors we train
another model
and then this other model makes
predictions again
and this model also makes some errors
and what we do is we train a third model
that corrects the predictions of the
second model
let's change this
and we can keep repeating this
we do this for many iterations and then
at the end what we do is
move it a little bit
and then we combine multiple predictions
into the final prediction
this idea behind boosting we
sequentially train multiple models and
each next model corrects the mistakes of
the previous one so let's say the model
3 here tries to correct the errors of
the model 2. the model 4 here corrects
the mistakes of model 3 and so on so
here the process is sequential so we
first always train uh model one and then
we train model two then we train model
three and so on unlike in random forest
when we can train all these different
models in parallel if we take these
models
and we replace
these models by trees
in this case we get gradient boosted
trees or gradient boosting trees ready
and
boosting
trees so this is what we will use for
this lesson and there is one library
that has quite a good implementation
it's called easy boost this is what we
will use for this lesson so now to
install extreme boost we do the usual
pip install and then the name of the
library which is in this case xgboost
i already have it so nothing should
happen for me and now we import it input
xg
boost and as usual we have some alias
xgb for short so now we installed
exterior boost we imported it the next
step we need to do is we need to wrap
our training data into a special data
structure internal to execute boost
called dematix so it's here in the
matrix so this data structure is
optimized for training xu boost models
it allows 6gb boost to train faster
what it needs it needs the feature
matrix then needs our target variable
and
it's called label
and what we can also pass here is
feature names feature names and we have
our features we have in our
dictionarizer so let's get them
and then this will be our
d train variable so d matrix for train
then let's do the same for validation so
it's uh
x
validation then the label is
y station so let's put this in one cell
so now we have all these d matrices and
now we can train a model so the trainer
model
we use the train function from xgboost
package and then it actually needs
multiple things here as we see so it
needs params it's called xgb params
we will define this later then we need
our d train matrix
and here
numbers rounds this is how many trees we
want to grow let's
do 200 this is just some arbitrary large
number now it's not important why 200
this is just some large value here we
need to specify some parameters
so there is a recommendation that
describes uh all the parameters that txj
boost has so this is the page
it tells what are the parameters there
and what are the values the important
ones are etta which is
the learning rate we will talk about
this a bit later but this is in essence
how fast our model learns the default
value is 0.3 and you can check the
default value in the page i just showed
you then max depth this controls the
size of the the trees which is the same
as in random forest and decision trees
the default value is six
then milled child weight is the same as
mean sample sleeve so how many
observations we should have in a leaf
node the default one is one so here we
have a binary classification task so we
want to classify our clients into
defaulting or non-defaulting for that we
need to specify objective so there are
many different objectives so ex-boost
can also be used for solving the
regression problem or different types of
classification problems so here what we
need is
we need binary logistic
so this is binary classification
logistic is means it will use something
similar to logistic regression so
remember we have sigmoid and all that so
it will use something similar here so we
have a binary classification model we
need to specify that so exe boost can
parallelize training so we need to
specify how many threads we use and
thread is the parameter for doing this i
have eight cores so i set it to eight
and then it also uses a lot of
randomization so we need to set the seat
so i'll set it to one and then finally
we need to set the verbosity parameter
i'll set it to one so it controls what
kind of warnings we have when we train
our model or do we want to see warnings
when training or not so here i think one
means show only warnings i think these
are the most important default
parameters there are of course more you
can refer to the page i showed you just
now but this should be enough for now
this thing returns a model so let's
train it
and you see so it outputs some warnings
so it says the default evaluation metric
or this objective was changed from error
to log loss okay and let's say if we
don't want to see this error i think
let's see what happens if we put zero
so in this case the warning is
suppressed and if we put two we see
we see a lot of things basically info
messages as well not just warnings so
let's put it at one so we want to see
warnings later we'll see how to get rid
of this warning but what we want to do
now is we want to test this model so
here's
this model has a function predict and we
already have our validation matrix in
here we created it so we pass the
validation here and what dxd boost
returns is already one dimensional array
with predictions so let's put it inside
wipe red
what we can do now is we can compute our
auc score y validation y prediction
and we see that our auc is 80 which is
quite good considering that we didn't do
anything else we only put the default
parameters here and that's it so for
default parameters this is quite good
and so let's see what happens if we just
train 10 models um 10 trees
i think it's actually even better
81.5 percent and these models also ex
boost also overfeeds we'll later see how
but yeah it's quite prone to overfitting
that's why we need to be careful about
how many trees we train
and the size of this trees so we don't
want these threes to be too big
in extra boost it's possible to monitor
the performance of the training
procedure so we can see what exactly is
happening at each step of the training
process what we can do is we can attach
after each iteration after each new tree
is trained we can immediately evaluate
it on our validation data we can see
what are the results there for that we
can create a watch list so watch list
contains the data sets on which we want
to evaluate our model so what we can put
here is we can put our training data set
here we need to give it a list of tuples
so first the actual data set and the
name of this data set so this is the
validation and validation
so this is the watch list so this is
what we will use to evaluate our model
during training
let's copy this here yes what we want to
specify here we want to specify the
watch list
this is a vals this is what is going to
be used for evaluation and let's train
it for 200 rounds let me rearrange it a
little bit
and what we need to specify and remember
i told you i'll tell you how to get rid
of this warning if we don't specify
anything here it will show us the error
rate yeah it's actually showing log loss
i think this is what the warning is
saying us that instead of error it will
print log loss block loss this is
something that uh logistic regression
and this model xgboost used to find the
best parameters the best splits this is
quite technical we're not interested in
this what we want to
see here is auc for that
let's specify a evaluation metric this
is what it's saying the default relation
metric so about metric ac
so let's use auc for evaluating the
model and now the warning is gone so
what happens here is so here we train
the first three we evaluated this first
three on the training data set and on
the validation data set then we trained
the second three evaluated this on both
data sets and so on and we have 200
rounds 200 trees so we do this basically
for every three here and you see that
auc on the training data goes to one so
here it achieves the perfect accuracy
yes it's here
99.99 and then after step 107 it reaches
100 percent you see course on the
validation data set it doesn't really
improve we see it stagnates around 80
and i think it slowly goes down a little
by little so
the model clearly overfits using this
output is not very convenient so just
going through this it's a bit difficult
so it would be nice to be able to plot
it then even before plotting it we can
instead of printing it at every step we
can print it at every five step or every
ten step for that there is this variable
civil parameter let's say if we want to
print the deviation at every five steps
so we do that and you see here it moves
with increments of five we get the same
information basically so we see that
here it um reaches uh perfect ac on
training but not validation yeah it's a
bit easier now to have a look here and
see what's going on so for example we
see that
here around step 25 this is the
best performance on the validation data
set i think even at step 10 it's already
quite good maybe we don't even need to
train more models than just 10 and it's
enough to stop at 10. it'll be
interesting to see this on a plot um the
problem with xgb boost is not easy to
extract this information so it just
prints this to
output to standard output there's no
easy way at least to my knowledge
there's no easy way to extract this so
what i sometimes do for that is there is
a way in jupiter notebook to capture
this
whatever is printed to standard output
and then do whatever we want with this
for that there is this magic command
called capture what it does it captures
everything that this code outputs to a
sting let's call this thing output it's
not string it's some special object that
we can use to get
the content out no something is
happening but we don't see it because
it's captured and take a look what is
inside this output
like standard output and we see this is
this is what we just captured so we can
print this
this is what this strain output
right we have it as a string as a python
string and we can actually parse this
and extract this information for that
so let's see we have this
string i'll call it just s and then we
can split this using this backslash n
means a new line so when we do split now
like this we split it by
let me just print it again
here we don't see this but at the end of
every line we have this slash n and this
is what we use for splitting and
actually this is top and this is encoded
as backslash t here backslash t and then
we have it for every line here and what
we do is we split by this
by this backslash n so we get a string
per each line and then let's take
let's take the first line
so
what we have here there are three
components the first is the number of
the three the number of iterations then
the evaluation on the train data set and
then evaluation on the validation data
set can again split it
this time using backslash t because this
is stimulation and as a result we get
three three things here the first is the
number of iterations the number of three
then only uh you see on drain e and ac
invalidation now we can write it to
two three variables so train
ac and validation you what this code
will do it will assign this part to this
variable this part to this variable and
this part to this variable now let's
execute that we see that
number of iteration is zero and we want
to turn this into a number so we want to
get rid of these brackets right here for
that we can do strip and say what kind
of characters we want to strip away so
now when we say we want to remove
brackets so it removes brackets and now
we want to turn this into an integer
this is how we can extract the number of
iteration then for training asc what we
can do is split using this column right
and then when we do this we again have
two elements here and we are interested
in
this one
this is how we get it this is a string
and we can turn the string into a float
by doing this by putting it inside float
and then we can do the same with
validation you see
all right and we can do this for every
line and then we will get
we can put this and say into a data
frame with a number of iterations with
ac on train and ac on validation and
then we can plot it and do some analysis
so let me remove that we don't need this
because i already have it in
in a function so we have a function here
actually it doesn't return the data
frame here it parses all that that we
saw maybe it's a good idea to actually
turn this into a data frame let me do it
now
and a number of iteration
then
hc on train
and ac convolution
and then we can turn this
data frame results data frame then so
this is a list of tuples
and columns here
will be
number iteration
then
train ac then validation you see right
and then we want to return the results
and the rest yeah we did we already saw
how it works so we split the
output of from this
output we split it by the new line
character backslash n and then each line
we split by tap and then it's doing the
same thing as we just saw and let's see
i hope it works
and it returns a data frame yes exactly
so data frame with results
it's called score
and we can plot it so here we have
number of iterations on the x-axis and
we have
let's say let's plot the ac on train and
then we'll do the same and plot auc on
validation
train here we have labor validation and
we want to show the legend
and we see here the train is always
growing yeah here around here it's i
think it's almost perfect and here it's
perfect or was it somewhere here i don't
know but here doesn't seem to make any
difference around here it's almost
perfect but for validation it's
different right see the peak is here but
then it declines and stagnates here so
it's not improving so here so this is
where we start overfitting
all right so we're over feeding here but
let's look only at validation
we can see it better here that we are
indeed overheating so it declines right
the accuracy on train stays at
ac on train states at 100 but this one
seems to decline so these are the
default parameters that we have
and yeah so we see now how we can train
the model with these default parameters
we also saw how we can
capture the output of xgboost and
display it and yeah we also talked about
this concept of watch list
so now what we want to do is we want to
tune the parameters of xg boost model so
we want to play again with the same
things as we did with random for us so
we want to change the max depth
parameter and we want to change this
other parameter here
mean child weight so we want to
experiment with them and
i also promised we will talk about this
learning rate this is probably the most
important parameter for gradient
boosting model so we will first talk
about this and then we will tune this
other two and this is something we will
do in the next lecture so see you soon